# Instalasi osu! pada perangkat MacOS

Laman ini akan menjelaskan hal-hal apa saja yang kurang lebihnya harus kamu lakukan untuk dapat menjalankan osu! pada perangkat macOS milikmu.

## Persyaratan minimum

- Kamu harus memiliki komputer dengan sistem operasi macOS yang terpasang di dalamnya.

## Instalasi osu!

osu! versi macOS pada umumnya belum stabil dan memiliki bug-bug tertentu yang tidak dijumpai pada osu! versi Windows. Agar osu! dapat beroperasi sebagaimana mestinya, kamu mungkin butuh untuk menyesuaikan hal-hal tertentu pada komputermu terlebih dahulu. Apabila kamu ingin menjalankan osu! pada perangkat macOS milikmu, ikuti langkah-langkah berikut:

1. Tuju [laman unduhan Wineskin berikut](https://osu.ppy.sh/community/forums/topics/1106057) dan unduh Wineskin versi terbaru yang tersedia.
2. Perbaiki berkas `osu!.app` yang kamu miliki dengan aplikasi osu!macOS Agent yang dapat kamu unduh pada [tautan berikut](https://osu.ppy.sh/community/forums/topics/1036678). Kamu juga dapat memperbaiki berkas `osu!.app` melalui Terminal sebagai berikut:
   1. Pindahkan berkas `osu!.app` ke desktop.
   2. Open Terminal, copy this command: `xattr -c 'Desktop/osu!.app'`, and press the `Return` key.
3. Double click on `osu!.app` to open it.
4. The installer will run automatically. The installation location cannot be changed and will reside directly inside `osu!.app`. Moving `osu!.app` will move all of the files that come with it including any [beatmaps](/wiki/Beatmap) and [skins](/wiki/Skin). You can also right click it and select `Show Package Contents` to view the files within the folder.
5. When the installation is complete, osu! will start up right after. osu!direct will be used to download some starter beatmaps for you.
6. osu! will prompt you to sign in or register.
   - If you have an account already, sign in.
   - If you need to register, see [Registration](/wiki/Registration), then sign in.

## Penyelesaian masalah (*troubleshooting*)

If you have difficulties opening osu!, then the following steps may help you:

1. Check the report generated by *osu!macOS Agent* for any errors.
   - If you are using an older version of macOS Catalina (before or equal to 10.15.4), then you must either update macOS (recommended) or disable [System Integrity Protection](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/disabling_and_enabling_system_integrity_protection).
2. Use the extractor "Archive Utility" builtin to macOS. Other extractors may not unzip the Wineskin correctly.
3. If you have an antivirus installed, ensure that it is disabled when you unzip osu! or else it may quarantine files required by Wine.
4. If nothing works, you can create a post in the [Help forum](https://osu.ppy.sh/community/forums/5).

## osu!lazer

[osu!lazer](https://github.com/ppy/osu) is the future game client of osu! currently in development. If you do not care about earning [performance points](/wiki/Performance_points), then it is recommended you try it out. In order to install it, take the following steps:

1. Go to the [osu!lazer download page](https://github.com/ppy/osu/releases/latest), download `osu!.app.zip` and unzip it.
2. Double click on osu! and press `Open` to open it.
3. If a dialog asks you to allow osu! to receive keystrokes:
   1. Click on the `Open System Preferences` button.
   2. Click on the padlock in the bottom left corner and enter your password.
   3. Tick the checkbox next to the osu! icon.